Average variable costs.
We divide the variable costs into the output.
How much was there?
100 by 10 is 10,
105 by 11 is 9.55.
And finally, average total costs.
How can we calculate?
We can divide the total volume,
the total costs into the output volume,
or we can just sum up
the average constant and average variable costs.
Before, they were 5 plus 10,
15 average total costs.
Now they are 4.55,
4.55 plus 9.55,
14.1.
And the last column contains the limit costs.
The limit costs are only one value.
The limit costs are the addition of the total costs
when the output is 1.
The addition of the output is 1,
the addition of the total costs is 5.
5 by 1 is 5.
The limit costs are 5 rubles.
These are additional costs
that we will have to bear
if we increase the output from 10 to 11.
Please note that the limit costs
can also be calculated by dividing the addition of the variable costs
by the addition of the output.
5 divided by 1 is 5.
Let's move on to the fourth question of our topic.
The costs in the short term.
Let me remind you once again
that the short term in the microeconomics
is the period during which
some factors of production can't be changed,
while others can be changed.
Usually, the capital is considered
the variable factor of production,
and the labor is considered the variable factor.
Accordingly, the costs of capital in the short term
are the constant costs,
and the costs of labor in the short term are the variable costs.
Let's see what the functions of costs in the short term can be.
Let's start with the constant costs.
Look at the slide.
Once again.
The constant costs are the costs
that do not change with the change in the volume of the output.
Look.
The output changes in the left graph,
and the constant costs do not change.
Accordingly, the function of the constant costs
is a straight line parallel to the x-axis.
Now let's talk about the function of the average constant costs.
How are the average constant costs calculated?
We've already talked about it.
They are obtained by dividing the constant costs by the volume of the output.
The constant costs are not changed by the numerator,
but the volume of the output is changed by the denominator.
Well, ask any value of the constant costs.
Let's say 10.
Let the output be equal to 1.
What are the average constant costs?
10 divided by 1 is 10.
Let's say the output is equal to 2.
The constants do not change.
What are the average constants?
10 divided by 2 is 5.
Let the output be equal to 5.
The average constant costs 10 divided by 5 is 2.
Let the output be equal to 10.
10 divided by 10 is 1.
Let the output be very large.
The average constant costs are 10.
10 to a very large value will be a very small value.
Accordingly, with the increase in the output,
the average constant costs tend to zero.
In general, the function of the average constant costs
is a parable,
hyperbola, excuse me,
which is visible on the right side of the graph.
And how will the functions of other costs change?
Here, the answer cannot be given unambiguously.
Everything will depend on the assumptions.
Let's first consider the simplified functions of costs.
They are based on the assumption
that the maximum costs are constant.
What does it mean that the maximum costs are constant?
This means that with the increase in the output,
the costs are increasing all the time
at the same value.
Let's take an example from trading.
Let there be a store in front of us
that sells, say, beer.
For trading, the volume of the output
is the number of sold goods,
that is, sold bottles of beer.
What are the costs in trading usually?
They are variable.
To sell beer,
you need to buy it from the store.
The more beer we sell,
the more beer we have to buy.
Accordingly, the costs of buying beer
increase with the volume of sales,
that is, with the volume of the output.
Therefore, for trading,
the costs of buying are variable.
All other costs, let's consider them constant.
Those that do not change with the increase in the output.
The rent is not changed,
the electricity is not changed,
the costs of electricity,
even if no one bought anything from us,
the rent must be paid,
the store is open, the refrigerators are working,
the store is lit.
We will also consider the sales salary
independent of the volume of the output,
that is, we will also consider it as a constant cost.
Look at the table.
The output changes from 0 to 100.
That is, the number of sold bottles changes from 0 to 100.
Constant costs I have determined in terms of 100 rubles.
They do not depend on the output.
And variable costs, I repeat,
are the costs of buying beer.
Let's assume that we buy every bottle of beer for 5 rubles.
So, if we did not buy or sell any beer,
the variable costs are 0.
If we bought and sold one bottle of beer,
the variable costs are the costs of buying this bottle,
that is, 5 rubles.
If we bought and sold two bottles of beer,
the variable costs are 10 rubles.
And so on.
15, 20, 25, and so on.
Variable costs are increasing all the time.
How much?
With each next unit of the output for 5 rubles.
These are additional costs or maximum costs.
Look.
The fifth column.
Maximum costs are always 5, 5, 5, 5.
What are the total costs?
With zero output, the variable costs are 0,
but the constant costs still have to be carried.
So, the total costs are constant.
100 rubles.
With one output, the constant costs are 100,
the variable costs are 5, and so on.
According to the well-known formulas,
we can calculate the average constant and average variable costs,
as well as the average total costs.
But here's what I want to draw your attention to.
The maximum costs are constant.
With each next unit of the output,
the maximum costs are increasing all the time
at the same value, at 5 rubles.
But in this case,
they are necessarily equal to the average variable costs.
In fact, if we have an output equal to 1,
the variable costs are 5.
With the output of 2 units, the variable costs are 10.
With 3 units, 15.
With 4, 20.
With 5, 25.
So, the average variable costs are always 5.
The average variable costs, in my conditional example,
are exactly equal to the purchase price of one bottle of beer.
And this is reflected in the following slide.
Look.
We have a figure along the x-axis.
And along the y-axis,
we have the maximum and average variable costs.
The maximum costs remain the same
with the increase in the output.
And they are necessarily equal to the average variable costs.
Now look at how the functions of the variable and the total costs
will work.
I have already talked about the constant costs.
The function of the constant costs
is parallel to the x-axis.
Let's go back to our table.
Look at how the variable costs change.
With the output of 0, they are 0.
With the output of 1, they are 5.
With the output of 2, they are 5.
With the output of 3, they are 5.
With the output of 4, they are 5.
With the output of 1, they are 5.
With the output of 2, they are 10, and so on.
So the function of the variable costs
is a linear function
coming from the origin of the coordinates.
This is how it is shown in the graph.
And how will the function of the total costs work?
Look.
With the output of 0,
the variable costs, as we have already said,
are 0.
But the constant costs are not 0,
because they must be carried
with any volume of the output.
So with the zero output,
the total costs are constant.
And then the function of the total costs
is a linear function
parallel to the function of the variable costs.
The difference between the total and the variable costs
is the constant costs.
And this value does not change.
Therefore, these two functions
go parallel to each other.
And now let's see
how the functions of the average costs work.
Let's recall the formula.
What are the average and total costs?
These are the average constant costs
plus the average variable costs.
What do we know about the average constant costs?
With the increase in the output,
they decrease and tend to 0.
And what do we know about the average variable costs?
In this model, they do not change,
they are a constant value.
But if this variable decreases and tends to 0,
and the second variable is a constant,
then what does the sum tend to?
The sum tends to the average variable costs.
This is shown in the graph.
Look.
The higher the output,
the lower the average total costs,
which, however, tend not to 0,
but to the average variable costs.
What conclusion can we draw?
The higher the output,
the lower the average constant
and, accordingly, the average total costs.
A simple question.
Suppose you study the economy
within the framework of the MBA program.
You study the economy as a group.
Apply the last learning I just did
to your group.
It's not difficult at all.
What is the number of listeners
for the MBA school?
Is it correct?
And what do we observe?
The more listeners in the group,
the less costs for the learning of one listener.
So, we have looked at the simplified functions of costs.
Such functions usually correspond to the practice of a small business.
But very often in business
you also have to face complicated functions of costs.
Here is another prerequisite.
The maximum costs are first reduced,
then reach the minimum,
and then begin to increase.
Look at the slide.
How to understand?
At first, with the increase of the output,
each additional unit of the product
requires less and less additional costs.
Then these additional costs become minimal.
After that, each additional unit of the product
requires more and more additional costs.
If soon it is so,
all functions of costs change.
Please look at the conditional example.
The next slide.
Here, in the first column,
the output changes from 0 to 10.
But the constant costs should not change by definition.
They are always 25, 25, 25, 25.
The variable costs change.
How do they change?
See in the table.
We can calculate all other indicators.
As always, the total costs
are the sum of the constant costs
and the variable costs.
Have you calculated?
Let's see now
how the function of the limit costs will change.
How can we calculate the limit costs?
We take the sum of the total costs
and divide by the sum of the output.
The sum of the output is always 1.
And what is the sum of the total costs at first?
55 minus 25. How much is it?
First 30.
Then the sum of the total costs.
24.
Then 20 and so on.
What do we see?
The limit costs decrease all the time
from 0 to 5,
reaching the value of 16.
After that, starting from the output 6 and so on,
the limit costs begin to increase.
The average and constant costs always decrease.
There is nothing new here.
But the functions of the limit costs
are the sum of the average and constant costs.
And look at what they will be now.
Here is a slide.
The limit and average costs.
Look again.
What happens to the limit costs?
As I said, they decrease at first,
then reach the minimum,
then increase.
What happens to the average and constant costs?
They decrease at first,
but decrease slower than the limit costs.
Then look.
At a certain interval of the output,
the limit costs are already increasing,
and the average and constant costs
are still decreasing.
And note that the average and constant costs
decrease until they are even higher than the limit costs.
And from here the most important thing is
that the average and constant costs
reach their minimum
at the point
where they are equal to the limit costs.
And finally, let's look at the function
of the average and constant costs.
This function is infinite.
For infinitely small values,
the average and constant costs are very large,
because the output is very small.
Then what?
They decrease
and also reach their minimum
at the point where they are equal to the limit costs.
At the point where they are equal to the limit costs.
So the function of the limit costs
necessarily intersects the functions
of the average, constant and average costs
at their minimum points.
After the minimum point has been passed,
the average and constant costs begin to increase.
And as they increase,
they are getting closer
to the function of the average, constant and average costs.
Think about why this is so.
What are the average and constant costs equal to?
We have already talked about this.
The average and constant costs
plus the average and constant costs.
But what are the average and constant costs aiming at?
At zero.
I have talked about this many times.
So the average and constant costs
aim at the average and total costs.
That's all.
The fourth question of this topic is
the costs in the short term.
There is also the fifth question of the topic.
The costs in the long term.
There is nothing fundamentally new there,
except that I want to emphasize
that in the long term
there are no constant costs.
All costs become variable.
Why?
Because in the long term
the company can change all the production factors.
It can hire additional workers,
it can install additional equipment,
it can rent a more spacious building.
All the production factors become variable,
so all the costs also become variable.
So there is no function of average and constant costs.
But there is one function.
The function of the limit costs
and there is a function of the average costs.
And it will be the same.
The function of the limit costs decreases at first,
then reaches the minimum,
then begins to increase.
The function of the average and constant costs
decreases at first,
then reaches the minimum
at the intersection point
with the function of the limit costs.
After that, the function of the average and constant costs
begins to increase.
Ladies and gentlemen,
we begin the fourth topic of our course.
Market structures.
Company behavior.
Here we will talk about
how the company operates in certain market conditions.
And it is probably obvious
that the behavior of the company
depends not only on the number of resources it has,
but also on the market environment in which it operates.
In other words,
the behavior of the company depends on the type of market.
And now look at the slide, please.
The first question that we will consider
is called the types of market structures.
Or we will talk about the types of markets.
Look, please.
There is a microeconomics that highlights
four types of market structures
or the form of market organization.
These are
perfect competition,
monopoly,
oligopoly,
monopolistic competition.
Let's start with perfect competition.
But very often perfect competition is misunderstood.
They think that perfect competition
is something like
completely cruel, ruthless competition.
In fact, it is nothing like that.
The definition is very simple.
Perfect competition
is a market structure
in which
there are so many
sellers and buyers
that none of them,
changing the volume of their offer
or their demand,
is able to affect the market price.
The price of a product
on a perfectly competitive market
is determined by the interaction
of thousands of independent buyers
and hundreds of independent sellers.
Each buyer and each seller
is a kind of a sand in the scale of the market
that can not change anything in the market
by their behavior.
Let's look at the signs of perfect competition.
I have already told you about the first sign.
Look, here is the sign.
Each of the very large numbers of sellers and buyers
occupies such a small share of the market
that it cannot change the market price
by its behavior,
but can sell or buy
as much of its product
at this price.
Let's take this example.
I will give it to you,
it will probably fit.
Here is a friend
living in the Volgograd province
calling me to Moscow
and asking how much tomatoes are in Moscow.
It was summer
and not last year,
I do not remember what I answered,
well, let's say 10 rubles per kilogram.
She had a curious curiosity.
She was going to bring a truck with Volga tomatoes to Moscow.
So,
what did she get from my information?
The price of tomatoes in Moscow
is 10 rubles per kilogram.
She came from the fact that
if today the price is such,
then its appearance or not
in the market
cannot affect the price in any way.
But on the other hand,
she is sure
that since it occupies a negligible small share
in the tomato market,
it is not profitable
for her to sell any number of tomatoes
at this price of 10 rubles per kilogram.
That is,
a ton, three, even five,
and she just does not have more.
It is clear that if she brought to Moscow
at the same time,
let's say, a thousand tons of tomatoes,
then such a large seller
would definitely affect the price.
But this would already be a problem.
This is not a condition of perfect competition.
I want to emphasize once again
that in the conditions of perfect competition,
the market price is determined by the interaction
of thousands of independent buyers,
hundreds of independent sellers,
each grain in the general market scale,
and no one taken separately
can affect the price.
Yes, another example,
so that it may be better understood.
You ran into a neighbor
at the entrance.
You see that he is walking
from the market.
You ask him,
how much are the tomatoes?
He answers, 10 rubles per kilogram.
So, what do you get out of it?
If the price has risen so fast today,
your appearance or non-appearance
on the market as a buyer
again cannot affect the price.
But you can buy a kilogram,
three, five, even ten rubles
for this price of 10 rubles.
That is, you also feel
like a perfect competitor
on the tomato market,
but not as a seller,
but as a buyer.
Let's look at the graph.
The equilibrium market price
and the demand curve
for the product of a separate company.
Look, two graphs are next to each other.
The left graph illustrates
the demand and supply
on a completely competitive market.
I repeat again,
there are thousands of buyers
and hundreds of independent sellers.
On the x-axis,
we put the price
and the total number of tomatoes
sold and bought on this market.
And what do we see?
That at the price of P with an asterisk,
we observe a kind of market equilibrium.
Demand on the tomato market
by all buyers
is equal to supply on this market
by all sellers.
Now look at the right graph.
You see, on the x-axis
I put, I mean,
the production, volume,
the volume of Kumaloe.
This is a separate company.
This is, figuratively speaking,
my tomato friend.
If on the left graph
the account is at 1000 tons,
then on the right graph
her account is only at tons.
She is a seed in the market scale.
And she accepts
the market price P with an asterisk
as a given price.
As economists say,
she is a price taker.
She accepts this price as a given price
and can sell any number of her tomatoes
at this price.
Please note
that in the conditions of perfect competition
between the two companies,
the price of P with an asterisk
cannot be increased.
No one will buy tomatoes from her.
What's the point
if there are hundreds of sellers
with a lower price?
And it makes no sense
to reduce the price
because at this price
she can sell
any number of her tomatoes.
This is the first sign
of perfect competition.
Let's go back to our signs.
Let's look at the second sign.
The complete uniformity of the product.
The absence of trademarks.
What does this mean?
The product of different sellers
is exactly the same
in the mind of the buyer.
The buyers do not distinguish
between the sellers
and the sellers themselves.
But when you come to the real tomato market,
you will still walk in rows.
You will see
that here the tomatoes are redder,
and this seller
seems to be less trustworthy.
There is nothing of this
in the conditions of perfect competition.
All sellers
are the same.
And all products are absolutely the same.
There is no difference.
Look at the third sign.
The possibility of free entry
to the market
and leaving it.
This means
that there are no barriers,
financial, administrative,
whatever,
that prevent
the buyer from entering
the market,
new sellers,
or the sellers
from leaving the market.
Let's try
such an example
for the sake of dissection.
Somewhere I read
that our current president,
Vladimir Putin,
in his temporary,
although in tight financial circumstances,
was working as a private importer
on his Zhiguli.
What did this mean?
That he just,
on one beautiful day,
got behind the wheel of his car,
drove to the streets of St. Petersburg,
that is, entered the market
of a private importer.
Some time passed,
Vladimir Putin
found an interesting job
as the President of Russia.
This means only that
he calmly put his Zhiguli
in the garage
and went to work in the Kremlin.
That is, he entered the market
as easily as he left it.
This is a sign of perfect competition.
There are no barriers
for entering and leaving.
The fourth sign
is the perfect knowledge
of the market
by the sellers
and buyers.
Again,
if you come to the real
tomato market,
you will probably
walk in the rows,
look,
maybe there
the tomatoes are better
or a little cheaper.
There is nothing of this
in the condition of perfect competition.
Here all the sellers
and all the buyers
are present.
They seem to have come together
at one point.
All the information about the market
is the same.
It is equally available
to all the sellers
and all the buyers.
But if
we sum up
all that I have said,
then you will probably agree
that perfect competition
is an abstraction.
Such a market
does not exist
in reality.
There are markets
more or less
adhering to this ideal,
but there is no market
in reality of perfect competition.
Then the question is,
if there is no market
of perfect competition,
why should we study it?
The answer is very simple.
For the same reason
that a chemist
studies the properties, for example,
of absolutely pure distilled water,
which does not exist in nature either.
It is simply impossible
to understand
the properties of any impurities
if we do not understand
or study the subject
in a certain ideal state.
I have already mentioned
the first type of market,
the perfect competition.
The second type of market
is called monopoly.
Let us read the definition.
A monopoly is a market structure
in which
the actions of the market
are carried out
by only one company
producing a product
that has no
close substitutes.
Monopolies are found
at the national,
regional,
and most often
at the local level.
But we have national monopolies
in Russia,
in particular
after the reform of the RAOES,
the Federal Network Company
will monopolize
the main lines
of the power generation.
Or, let us say,
in our country
it is a national monopoly.
Or, let us say,
in our city
there is only one company
offering
certain services.
And this is a monopoly.
But still,
the next market structure
is more common.
The oligopoly.
What is it?
Let us look at the definition.
The oligopoly
is a market structure
characterized
by a small number
of active firms.
The oligopoly
is a market structure
characterized by a small number
of active firms.
Here are some examples of the oligopoly.
For example,
two airlines
on the same route.
Or in Moscow
the cellular network market
is controlled
by, if I am not mistaken,
four companies.
In general, the oligopoly
is considered
when there are
no active firms.
This is a rather
common case
of the oligopoly.
The oligopoly
is a very interesting
market structure.
Look,
when we were looking
at the perfect competition,
we saw
that when a particular
seller
makes a decision,
he does not look
at other sellers.
He is a pebble
in the scale of the market.
He just accepts
the market price.
A monopolist
does not look
at competitors
for the simple reason
that there are no monopolies
in the conditions.
But the oligopolist
acts as he is allowed
by his own capabilities
to influence
the market price
of the firm.
The oligopolistic situation
is like a card game
where there is no
single, pre-set
behavior model.
Each player
plays as he is allowed
by his own cards
and as his competitors
play.
That is,
a strategic behavior
is formed.
At the same time,
a separate
oligopolist
can choose
a particular form of competition,
a particular strategy of competition,
or
adopt a strategy of
a conspiracy.
This also happens.
And the fourth type of market
is a monopolistic
competition.
Let's read the definition.
A monopolistic competition
is a market structure
in which a group of goods
that are close
substitutes
is produced by a large
number of independent
firms.
I will try to explain.
Let's recall
the perfect competition
once again.
There were
a lot of firms.
Theoretically speaking,
there are an infinite number of firms.
In the conditions
of monopolistic competition,
there are not so many firms,
but there are also a lot of them.
But there are fundamental differences.
Remember I said
that in the case of perfect competition,
the products of
individual firms
are absolutely indistinguishable
in the eyes of the buyers.
And the firms themselves are absolutely the same.
There is nothing of the sort
in the case of monopolistic competition.
Here,
each firm
has a certain feature
that distinguishes
its product
or itself
from other firms.
That is,
it is a kind of
mini monopoly.
It is a kind of mini monopoly
on a very narrow market segment.
Here is an example.
There are a lot of cafes in our city.
But I distinguish
this cafe from that one.
What?
Maybe this cafe,
as I think,
may feed better in this cafe.
Maybe there are nicer waitresses.
Maybe the interior is more attractive.
Or maybe this cafe is just
closer to my house.
That is,
in the case of monopolistic competition,
I repeat once again,
individual firms,
having some distinguishable features,
have,
albeit insignificant,
but still monopoly power
on a narrow market segment.
And now look.
It is necessary to distinguish
a pure monopoly
and monopoly power.
Monopoly power arises
where a separate firm
has some control over the price.
That is,
it can change the price
within certain limits.
This is not the case
with perfect competition.
Please look at the left graph.
On the left we have
a perfectly competitive firm.
There I have already said
that in the conditions of perfect competition,
a separately acquired firm,
being a pebble
on a general market scale,
can sell
any number of its products
at the market price.
That is,
the demand function
for a product of a perfectly competitive firm
is a horizontal line.
The market can buy
any number of its products
at the market price
from this firm.
A perfectly competitive firm
cannot change the price
by definition.
But a firm
with monopoly power
can change the price
to a greater or lesser extent.
Please look at the right graph.
There the demand function
for a product of a firm
has a negative slope.
This means
that a firm can
increase or decrease the price.
But it is clear
that increasing the price
will result in a decrease
in the demand for its product.
And
decreasing the price
will result in
an increase.
No super monopoly
can cancel the demand law.
But what is obvious
and important
is that the lower
the slope of the demand
for a product of a firm,
the lower
its monopoly power.
So,
I just said
that
the slope of the demand
for a product of a firm
can be judged
by the extent
of its monopoly power.
Please look at this graph.
The quantity of a product, as always,
the price of a product,
and let's say
the demand function
goes like this.
Look at this.
What does it mean?
You see, the function has
a rather high slope.
So,
a firm can
increase the price
quite significantly
from P0 to P1.
You see,
a significant increase in price
without being afraid
of losing a large amount of demand.
In other words,
it is difficult for a consumer
to do without a product of this firm.
And even with a large increase in price,
the decline in demand
will be insignificant.
So,
we say
that a firm
has a large, high monopoly power.
Now,
imagine
a monopoly-competitive firm.
The demand function
for its product
is very slow.
Let's say,
it is a small company.
A firm can increase the price.
This is the demand function
for its product.
But pay attention,
you see,
the firm has increased the price
very insignificantly.
And how much has it lost in demand?
A lot.
You see,
a small increase in price
has led to a significant decline in demand.
Why is that?
Because in a monopoly-competitive environment,
the product has a lot of substitutes.
Therefore,
with a small increase in price,
buyers can easily
switch to the product
of other firms.
And what is the worst case?
Perfect competition.
When the supply line
is not in the supply chain,
the product is not in the supply chain.
And the product is not in the supply chain.
And what is the worst case?
When the supply line
for a firm's product
becomes so sluggish
that it turns
into a horizontal line.
That is,
the firm has absolutely no control
over the market price.
It can only accept the price.
So,
now let's look
at the reasons
why a monopoly power
can arise and exist.
I will highlight
three reasons.
The first reason is very simple.
Exclusive rights
provided by the authorities.
Let's say,
local or regional authorities
or general Russian authorities
allow my firm
to engage in this kind of activity.
And the other firms
simply do not issue
the appropriate license.
As a result,
there is an administrative monopoly.
If the license
is issued by several firms,
we get
an administrative
oligopoly.
And this is
the second reason
why a monopoly power
exists.
It is an exclusive
ownership
of any production resource.
I have already mentioned
that in order to
produce something,
resources are needed.
Imagine, please,
that some particularly important
product
is produced
by a certain company
and this resource
is in the exclusive
ownership
of this company.
Only this company
can produce this product.
Others cannot
and our company
is a monopolist.
For example,
at one time
the monopolist
on the American
aluminum market
was Alcoa.
Alcoa was founded
on the fact
that only Alcoa
owned all the
boxes in Chile.
Or only this surgeon
can perform
a unique surgery.
He is a monopolist
of his talent.
Only he has
a great talent
and on this basis
a monopoly arises.
Or
only this company
has a patent
for the latest
technological development.
Again,
it becomes a monopolist.
If any resource
belongs to several companies,
is available to several companies,
a monopoly is formed,
not a monopoly,
but an oligopoly.
The third
reason
of monopoly power
is the increasing
return on scale.
Here it is a little
more complicated.
Let's recall
what is
the increasing return
on scale.
What does it mean?
When does it arise?
When do we talk
about the increasing return
on scale?
When
the growth,
the increase
of the number
of resources used
in N times,
the production increases
more than in N times.
We talked about it
in the previous topic.
But if there is
a place for the increasing
return on scale,
it means
that the more
the production,
the less the company
costs
per unit of production.
Think about it.
Let's say,
a company is twice as large
as a small one.
It uses twice as much
labor and capital
as a small one.
And the production
increases
three times.
This means
that the production
costs per unit
will be less.
So,
in this case,
the larger the volume
of production,
the less the production
costs per unit
of production.
And if this is the case,
the companies
will start to increase.
Look at it.
At the beginning
of the 20th century,
dozens of independent companies
operated on the car market
in the United States.
What happened next?
Let's say,
several companies
grew larger.
The number of resources
increased
two times.
And the production
increased four times.
This means
that the larger companies
spent
less than
the production
costs.
What does this mean?
The larger companies
grew larger,
the smaller companies
grew smaller.
And so,
in the end,
only one company
will remain on the market.
If there are several companies
on the market,
we are talking about
natural oligopoly.
Look at the definition
of natural monopoly.
Natural monopoly.
Natural monopoly
is a company
that can satisfy
any market demand
with small and short
and long-term
average costs
than those
that would be created
if there were two
or more companies
operating on the market
instead of it.
What is the special feature
of natural monopoly?
It is that its special
monopoly position
is not based
on an administrative resource,
nor on any other factors
that can be eliminated.
Its monopoly position
is based on
the principle
of property costs.
And here is an important conclusion.
It is pointless
to fight against natural monopoly
by enlarging it.
If we
create two companies
instead of one
large company
that is a natural monopoly,
each of them
will have twice
less output
than a large company.
And the costs
will be
one unit
more.
I will try
to illustrate
natural monopoly
with a number of examples.
Here is the simplest example.
In our houses
there are
two pipes
in the kitchen
one is hot
and the other is cold.
Water
is supplied by
one company
Mosvodokanal.
But in fact
monopoly is bad
most often.
When monopoly
is usually high prices
it is usually
low quality.
Why then,
if monopoly is bad
why don't we
chase competition
and supply
many pipes
with hot and cold water
belonging to different companies?
Then companies
could compete with each other
and we could choose
the water that is cheaper
or cleaner.
It is not done
for a very simple reason.
The costs for each liter of water
will increase.
Here is a very conventional example.
Let's say
water consumption
per unit of time
does not matter,
per year, per month, per day
is 100 liters.
To supply a pipe
with water to an apartment
we need to spend 100 rubles.
It turns out
that the costs
for one liter of water
will be 1 ruble.
Now imagine
that we are chasing competition
and we supply
at least two pipes
that supply water
to different companies.
Two different companies
supply water to our homes.
But then
if two pipes
the costs for the water
will increase
by two times
and will be 200 rubles in total.
And water consumption
in an apartment
will remain
it will not change
it will remain 100 liters.
And what will happen?
The costs
for each liter
will be 2 rubles.
This means
that it is not profitable
to replace one pipe
with another.
It is not profitable
to create several companies
that compete with each other.
The costs for one liter
of water
will increase.
This is a natural monopoly.
I repeat
a natural monopoly
is a company
whose monopoly
is based on the advantage
in costs.
If we are in the order
of competing
instead of one company
we create several
the costs for one liter
will increase.
We have just received this
in my conditional example.
Another example
Raui S.Russia
This company
is engaged in many things.
It is engaged in the generation
of electricity
and the transmission of electricity
by lines of electricity
and through its subsidiary companies
implementation.
Look,
these are all
power plants
generating companies.
This is a line of electricity.
And this is the sale of electricity
to consumers.
Which of these three spheres
of activity
of Raui S.Russia
is a natural monopoly?
Obviously,
the line of electricity.
The main advantage
of this line
is that
the Raui S.Russia's own reform
provides for its liquidation
in its current form.
From Raui S.Russia
will be allocated
as independent companies
wholesale generating companies
and territorial generating companies.
Generation
can be
in the sphere of competition.
Generating companies
can compete with each other.
There is no natural monopoly here.
But the line of electricity
should be the same.
Because if we
along with this line
will lay another one
for the sake of competition,
the costs for the power plant
will increase
by exactly two times.
And, accordingly,
the costs for each kilowatt hour
of transmission of electricity
will increase.
That is, the line of electricity
will be the same.
And after the reform
of Raui S.Russia
the line of electricity
will remain in the property
of the federal network company.
This will be a natural monopoly
in which the control package of shares
belongs to the state.
Well, good.
And if we take the sphere
of Gazprom,
what is there
to be?
Natural monopoly.
Obviously, gas pipelines.
Actually, the production of gas
can be done by independent companies.
But the pipe
is not filled
to the end.
It is better if there is only one.
Otherwise, the costs for the gas transmission
will increase.
In the sphere of Raui S.Russia
the Russian railway
is a natural monopoly.
Obviously,
the railway infrastructure
and the railway carriages
can be private property
of independent
and competing
companies.
But they are not
natural monopolies.
Actually, this is what
the Russian railway
is.
Sooner or later
only the railway carriages
and the infrastructure
will remain in the property
of Raui S.Russia.
The rest will be the property
of independent companies
that will compete with each other.
So,
we have considered
different types
of existing market structures.
Let's move on
to the second question
of the second part.
The first question is
whether the company's
revenue is
a total revenue.
What does it mean?
It is very simple.
The company's revenue
is the product of
the product's price
multiplied by the volume
of the output.
You can see the formula
on the slide.
TR is equal to
the usual formula of the revenue.
Another term
is the average income
of the company.
The average income
of the company
is the private
division of the revenue
by the volume of the output
or the implementation.
But
it is not difficult to understand
that if the revenue
is divided by the volume of the output,
the price will be obtained.
So,
the average income
is just another
name for the price.
Graphically,
how can we build
the function of the revenue?
If we are dealing
with a completely
competitive company,
what is its difference?
Remember,
if the company's
revenue is zero,
the price is set.
The company cannot
change this price.
This is why
the function of the revenue
from the output
of a completely competitive company
is a linear function
that starts from the coordinates.
If the revenue is zero
in the zero-output,
the price is set
in the one-output.
We get the output
multiplied by the set price
and so on.
Accordingly,
the function of the revenue
will be linear.
The next
very important
concept
in the microeconomics
is the marginal income.
Marginal revenue.
The definition of the marginal income
is read on the slide.
The marginal income
is the increase
in the revenue
when the sales
are increased
by one unit.
That is,
MR is equal to
delta TR
divided by delta Q.
Doesn't marginal income
remind you of anything?
What is the marginal income?
It is something we studied
in the previous topic.
Remember, in the previous topic
we talked about marginal costs.
Let's recall.
Marginal costs
are the increase
in the total costs
when the sales
are increased by one unit.
And the marginal income
is the increase
in the revenue
when the sales
are increased
by one unit.
Accordingly,
the marginal income
is the additional income
that the company gets
when the additional units
of the product
are produced and sold.
Take a look.
The simplest example
of the calculation
of the marginal income
is shown on the slide.
Yes,
just a small remark.
While we are talking
about a completely competitive company,
its marginal income
is equal to the price of the product.
In fact,
a completely competitive company
sells any amount
of its product
at the market price.
The price for a completely competitive company
is the given price.
And if this is true,
then each additional unit
of the product
brings the company
additional revenue,
additional income
equal to this price.
If, for example,
the company sells
a product at the price of 10 rubles,
each additional unit
of the product
will increase
the company's revenue
by 10 rubles.
Thus, the company's marginal income
is equal to the price
of the product
it sells.
And now,
please look at the table
on the slide.
You see,
the company's output changes
in the first column.
I change it here
from 0 to 5.
The price, as we have already said,
for a completely competitive company
is constant,
let's say 10 rubles.
By multiplying the price
by the volume of sales,
I get
the company's revenue.
It changes
with the change in the output.
And you see,
it changes linearly
0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50,
as we have just said.
What is the marginal income equal to?
Let's calculate.
What is the marginal income?
It is the delta of the revenue,
that is, the return on the revenue
divided by the return on the revenue.
The return on the revenue
is always 1,
and the return on the revenue
is always 10.
That is,
the marginal income
is equal to
the price of the product
for a completely competitive company.
I repeat,
for a monopoly.
We will talk about it later.
Let's move on
to the third question.
The balance
of a completely competitive company.
Here we assume
that the company
strives
to maximize
its profit.
What is a profit?
It is very simple.
Look at the slide.
A profit
is the difference
between the company's revenue
and its total profit.
That is,
the profit is equal to
the revenue
minus the total
cost.
I repeat,
the company wants
to maximize
this difference,
that is, the profit.
Theoretically,
the problem is solved very simply.
The company's profit
is maximized
by the total
cost.
How to explain it?
Look.
My company
is engaged
in the production
of a product
or a service.
Let's say
I increase
the total
cost
by a fraction.
I increase
the total
cost
by one more fraction.
I get
additional income
or in our terms
the maximum income.
That's good.
But at the same time
I will have to bear
additional costs.
That's bad.
Nevertheless,
if the additional income,
that is, the maximum income,
is higher than the additional costs,
that is, the maximum costs,
then the additional
unit of the production
will increase
the profit
of my company.
And while
the maximum income
exceeds the maximum costs,
the increase
of the production
leads to the increase
of the profit.
The total profit
of the company
is increased
by all units of production.
So,
as soon as the maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs,
the additional unit
of production
stops increasing
the total profit
of the company.
And the total profit
has reached
the maximum.
So,
the profit of a completely
competitive company
at such a volume of production
is equal to
its maximum costs.
Let's,
to make it clearer,
look at
a conditional numerical example.
Let's say,
we have a company
that is producing
a certain amount of goods.
Let's look at
a conditional numerical example.
Here,
please,
look at the table.
In the first column,
there are changes in production
from 0 to 10.
In the second column,
there are constant costs.
Well, the constant costs
do not change
by definition,
they do not depend on production.
The variable costs
are shown
as variable costs
change with the change in production.
These values
are given initially.
All other values,
at least in terms of costs,
are calculated.
Knowing the constant
and variable costs,
we can calculate
the total costs.
We can calculate
the average constant costs,
the average variable costs,
and the average total costs.
I hope you remember the formulas.
And finally,
in the next column,
we have
the maximum costs.
How do we get
the maximum costs?
Look again.
I remind you,
the maximum costs
are the addition
of the total costs
when the output
is 1.
The output always increases
by 1.
I divide the addition
of the total costs
by 1 when the output is 1.
So,
when the output
goes from 0 to 1,
the total costs
increase by 32 rubles.
These are the maximum costs.
These are the additional costs
that we will have to bear
if we want to increase
the output
from 0 to 1.
Then,
we increase the output
by 1,
from 1 to 2.
How much do the total costs increase?
By 20 units.
These are the maximum costs
when the output
goes from 1 to 2.
And so on.
Please note
that the maximum costs
decrease at first,
then reach the minimum.
Do you see the minimum?
At the output of 4 units,
the maximum costs
become minimal.
And then the maximum costs
begin to increase.
That is, we deal
with the classic
U-shaped curve
of the maximum costs
that we have already discussed
in the previous topic.
The next column
is the price.
But if the company
is completely competitive,
then, as I have said many times,
the maximum income
of such a company
is always equal to the price
of the product
I have set the price,
the price is 30,
the maximum income
of a completely competitive company
is always constant
and equal to the price.
Now look carefully
at the table.
We increase
the output all the time.
And so,
starting
from 2 units of the output,
the maximum income
or price
exceeds the maximum costs.
For example,
at the output of 3 units
the maximum income
is equal to
30,
and the maximum costs
are equal to
12.
What does this mean?
That if we release
the third unit of the product,
our profit
will increase.
In fact,
look at the last column.
The profit in this zone
is still negative,
but
when the output is increased,
the negative profit
begins to decrease.
That is, the profit increases.
And look,
at the output of 5 units,
we already get
a positive profit.
It is equal to 8.
Nevertheless,
at this output
we will not stop.
Why?
Because if we release
the sixth unit of the product,
the maximum income is equal to
30,
and the maximum costs
are equal to 18.
That is, the sixth unit of the product
will require 18 rubles
of additional costs,
but will bring 30 rubles
of additional income.
So,
how much will the profit increase?
By 12 rubles.
And in fact,
at the output of 5 units
the profit was 8,
and at the output of 6 units
it is already equal to 20.
So, the profit increased
by 12 rubles.
Let's look further.
At the output of 7 units,
what do we see?
The maximum income is 30,
the maximum costs are 24.
So, the additional unit
of the product
increases our profit
by 6 rubles.
That's how it happened.
The profit increased by 6 rubles
and reached 26 rubles.
And when does the profit become maximum?
It becomes maximum,
strictly speaking,
at the moment
when the maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs.
Look,
at the output of 8 units
the maximum income
is 30,
the maximum costs are also 30.
They were equal to each other.
This means
that the profit stopped increasing.
If at the output of 8 units
the maximum income
was at least a penny more
than the maximum costs,
this additional unit
of the product
would increase
our profit.
So, as soon as
the maximum income
was equal to the maximum costs,
the profit reached its maximum.
But the 9th unit of the product
is useless to be produced.
Why?
What is the maximum income
of the 9th unit of the product?
30, as always.
And what is the maximum costs?
40.
So, the 9th unit of the product
will reduce our total profit
by 10 rubles.
This is how it happened.
The total profit
at the 9th unit of the product
is only 16.
That is,
the maximum point has been reached.
at the output of 8 units
the company is in a state of equilibrium.
It is not profitable
to reduce its output
or increase its profit.
And now let's look
at the same thing,
but on the graph.
Look carefully,
without hurrying,
at what is depicted
on this graph.
All these graphs
could be obtained
if we
started to transfer
to the graph
the total profit
at the 9th unit of the product.
We started to transfer
the figures from the previous table
to the graph.
In fact,
you see the price line.
It goes horizontally
parallel
to the x-axis,
the output axis.
The price is set.
It does not change
with the change
of the output.
The output changes,
the price is constant.
And the maximum profit,
as we have already said,
is equal to the price.
In my example,
the price was equal to 30 rubles.
And it does not change.
It does not change.
Look again
at the function of the maximum costs.
What do the maximum costs do?
First they decrease,
then they start
to increase.
This is reflected in the graph.
You see, the function of the maximum costs
first decreases,
then at some volume of the output
it reaches the minimum,
then it starts to increase.
You see, the function of the MC.
Now look at the function
of the AC.
What is the AC?
This function
of the average total costs.
What is it?
Let's go back to the table.
Look at this function.
This is how it is.
It first decreases
with the increase of the output
the average total costs of AC.
Then,
at the output of 7,
as you can see,
it reaches the minimum,
and then the average total costs
of the AC
decrease.
And the maximum costs
start to increase
as reflected in our graph.
In this graph
you can see
several critical points.
The first point
corresponds to the output
Q1.
Look at the function
of the MC.
What do we observe
at the interval
from 0 to Q1?
At this interval
the maximum costs
look carefully
exceed
the price of the product
or the maximum income of the company.
So, at this interval
the losses of the company
only increase.
This is how it is.
You see,
at the output
from 0 to 1
the maximum costs
are greater than the maximum income.
Accordingly,
at the output of 1
the losses of the company
are negative.
The losses are the biggest.
Let's look further
at the graph.
What do we observe
at the interval
from Q1 to Q2?
At this interval
the maximum income
is greater than the maximum costs.
This means
that each additional unit
of the output
already increases
our profit.
But the total profit
remains negative
due to the load of the past losses.
And what do we observe
at the output of Q2?
At this Q2 output
the price of the product
becomes equal
to the average total costs.
Do you see this?
At the Q2 output
the price is equal
to the average total costs.
But if the price
is equal to the average costs
and the average costs
are the costs
per unit of the output,
if the price is equal
to the costs per unit of the output,
then the profit becomes
equal to 0.
Therefore,
the Q2 output
corresponds to
the point of no loss.
At the Q2 output
the profit of the company
is equal to 0.
At the Q2 output
the company
is in the loss zone.
It is in the loss zone.
And only when the Q2 output
is reached
the company
reduces the costs.
That is,
it reaches the point of no loss.
If the loss is less,
we are doomed to loss.
If we reach the Q2 output,
the company reaches this output,
the loss is equal to 0,
but the profit is equal to 0,
we find ourselves in the point of no loss.
What does
the further increase
of the output
lead to?
The price
is higher
than the average
total costs.
That is,
with each unit of the output
we get more money
than the costs per unit of the output.
So, we find ourselves
in the profit zone.
And look,
the price
is always
higher than the average costs.
So,
the more
we produce,
our profit is.
The more our profit is.
And where does
the maximum profit
occur?
It occurs
at the point
where
the company's maximum costs
become equal
to the price.
That is,
at Q3 output
the company receives
the maximum
total profit.
Good.
And if we increase
the output,
the over-output Q3,
what do we get?
What do we see?
The maximum costs
are already higher
than the price.
And this means
that the maximum profit is achieved.
The maximum profit is achieved.
And the profit
is already decreasing.
The point of equilibrium
of the completely competitive company
is Q3.
At this output
the company receives
the maximum profit.
If the company increases
the output,
in the interval
Q3 to Q4
the profit is still positive,
but the maximum is achieved.
And at the output
equal to Q4,
what do we see?
The price of the product
again becomes equal
to the average cost
or the cost per unit of production.
But if the price is equal to the cost per unit of production,
the total profit becomes
equal to
the second point of non-profitability.
But if we continue to insist
and continue to increase the output,
the profit will become negative
and we will again
fall into the zone
of non-profitability.
Let's now
complicate the situation a little.
Imagine
what a terrible thing has happened.
I told you
that the completely competitive company
does not have
control over the price.
Regardless of the will of the company,
the market price
has fallen.
And now it is
look at the table
on the new slide.
Now the market price
is 24 rubles.
All other data
concerning the costs
remain the same.
What does this mean now?
Look carefully
at the last column.
At the last column.
At such a low price,
the company is doomed
to losses
at any volume of production.
No matter what production
the company will suffer
from losses.
What can the company do
in such conditions?
It can
only minimize
the losses.
The maximum profit
in this case
means the minimum
loss.
But the rule remains the same.
The maximum profit
is achieved
when the maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs.
Look at
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Look at the 8th
and 9th columns.
In the 8th column
we have
the maximum costs.
In the 9th column
the maximum income
is equal to the price.
And where are
the maximum costs
equal to the maximum income?
At the 7th volume.
And look at this.
At this volume
the company's profit
is the maximum
in the sense
that the loss is minimal.
I repeat,
the maximum profit in this case
means the minimum loss.
The loss is minimal
at the 7th volume.
But here
the main question arises.
You see,
the company cannot avoid losses.
At such a low price.
It can only minimize
the loss.
Maybe we should just stop?
Stop production and that's it?
We cannot avoid losses.
Let's shut down.
Let's stop the production.
If the product is lossy,
let's stop production.
And that's it.
In fact,
it will be a bad decision.
Why?
Let's recall
the theory of costs.
In a short period
there are constant costs
that cannot be avoided.
Even if the company shuts down,
that is, the production will be equal to zero,
there are constant costs
that will have to be incurred.
What are the constant costs equal to?
They are equal to
the second column, look,
60.
So if the company shuts down,
it will lose its revenue.
It does not produce anything,
it does not sell anything.
The revenue will be equal to zero.
It will save money, of course,
on variable costs.
With zero production,
variable costs are also equal to zero.
But constant costs
will still have to be incurred.
And this means
that the loss of the company will be greater.
And if we shut down,
the loss of the company
will be equal to constant costs.
This is reflected
in the last column.
With zero production,
the company's profit is minus 60.
That is, the company is losing
in the amount of 60 rubles,
and this loss is exactly equal
to constant costs.
Well, if
this is still not very clear,
I will try to give
such a practical example.
Well, you probably know
that now
our country is buying in oil dollars.
Oil prices of our Urals brand
exceed 60 dollars per barrel.
Now it's hard to believe,
but in 1998
the average annual price
of our oil,
the world price,
was about 11 dollars per barrel.
At such a low price,
many of our oil companies
were making losses.
But nevertheless,
they did not close.
And this is the reason
why we are in a crisis.
Why?
Because
in a short period
there are constant costs,
which are impossible
to avoid.
And if our oil companies
did not close,
they would stop pumping oil.
They would lose their profits,
save on variable costs,
but the oil companies
have a large volume
of costs,
which they have to bear
regardless of whether
they produce something
or not.
Therefore, in this case
there would be even more losses.
This is reflected
in my conditional numerical example.
Well, I tried to
depict the same
on a drawing.
Look at the following slide.
What is the optimal output?
Let's go back
to the previous slide.
The optimal output
is 7.
At the output of 7
the loss of the company
is minimal,
that is, the profit is maximum
as far as possible.
What is the revenue
at this volume of output?
168.
What are the total costs
at this volume of output?
At the output of 7?
Look.
The TC column,
total costs,
184.
And what do we observe?
That our total costs,
as I said,
exceed the revenue.
We are incurring losses.
And what are the variable costs
at the output of 7?
124.
What do we observe?
That the revenue
does not cover the total costs.
This is true.
But it covers the variable costs
and partially covers the constant costs.
Look at the drawing.
What is our revenue
at the optimal output?
168.
The total costs are 184.
The variable costs are 124.
And the constant costs are 60.
But they are always 60.
So we see
that the revenue covers
the variable costs
and partially covers the constant costs.
If we would have rolled the output,
we would have lost the revenue
and saved on the variable costs
and incurred even more losses
in the amount
of all the constant costs.
But when will the company
leave the market
even in a short period?
Here is when.
Look at the next slide.
When the price
falls to such a low level
that the revenue
at the optimal output
does not cover
even the variable costs.
There is no point
in staying in the market
and continuing to produce
in a short period.
We need to stop the output.
We will lose the revenue
but save on the variable costs
and incur even more losses
and the loss will be less
than if we stay in the market.
Now I am trying
to show all this
on the graphs.
Look.
The functions of the costs are traditional.
Everything is as it was.
There is nothing new here.
Let's say
the price
is equal to
P1
at the beginning.
What output does the company choose?
Q1.
Why Q1?
Because we remember the rule
that the profit of the company
is the maximum
at such an output
that the price
or the maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs.
The price is equal to the maximum costs.
Imagine that
regardless of the will of the company
the competitive company
does not affect the price
as we said.
The price falls to the level of P2.
Where is the output
with the maximum income?
It is always the maximum income
at such an output
with the price
equal to the maximum costs.
Where is this intersection point?
The point is now E2
and the output is Q2.
The price is equal to the maximum costs.
Where is the intersection point?
The point is now E2
and the output is Q2.
But at this output
the company
does not get
any economic profit
at this price
and at this output.
At this output
it is better to say
at Q2
the price is equal to
not only the maximum costs
but also the average total costs.
Look carefully.
Do you see the line of the average total costs?
The line is AC.
The function AC
decreases and then reaches the minimum
at the point E2.
At the price of P2
the company
does not get any profit
at this price.
The economic profit is zero.
And if the price falls to P3
what do we see now?
At any volume of the output
the price is lower than the average costs.
The cost is lower than the unit of production.
So, losses are inevitable.
But nevertheless
to minimize the losses
the company chooses the output
always
at the price of P3
where the price of P3
is equal to the maximum costs.
This is Q3.
The company
is losing.
It is minimizing the losses
at this point.
But pay attention
to what is important.
At the price
of Q3
the price
is higher than
the average costs.
Pay attention.
At the price of Q3
the price is always P3
and the function of the average costs
of A, B, C
is lower.
This means
that if the price of Q3
is lower than the average costs
of A
then the company
partially covers
the variable costs
and partially covers the constant costs.
It is better to stay in the market.
This is what I told you earlier.
But if the price
falls below the level of P4
look what happens.
If the price
falls below the level of P4
the price will be
lower
than the minimum
of the average variable costs.
In this case
the company must close
in a short period
because the revenue
will not cover
not only the constant
but also the variable costs.
And the further continuation
of production
will lead only to losses.
Therefore
the point E4
is called
the minimum
of the average variable costs.
If the price
falls below
the revenue
will not cover
the variable costs.
It is necessary to close.
But I repeat
this is the theory
of the equilibrium of the company
in a short period.
I want to repeat
that if the price
falls below the level of P3
the company will lose money.
But in a short period
the company will remain in the market.
Otherwise the losses
will be even greater
because there are constant costs
that cannot be avoided
in a short period.
What is the difference
between a long period
and a short period?
In a long period
all costs
can be re-examined.
For example
in a short period
we cannot re-examine
the lease agreement
because the lease payment
is a constant cost.
The lease payment is based on the agreement
and we cannot avoid it.
But in a long period
we can refuse
the lease agreement
re-examine it
change the lease agreement
and try to optimize the costs.
Therefore
in a long period
the company will lose money
from the market
if it cannot
change the costs
for example
to conclude
a more profitable lease agreement.
Let's move
to the fourth question.
Before we started
we talked about
the balance
of a completely competitive company.
And now
we will talk
about how the balance
of a company
with monopoly power
is achieved.
Let me remind you
a company with monopoly power
can be in the well-known
markets
and can manage
the price.
It can set
a higher price
but then it will face
a drop in demand.
It can set a lower price
but the demand for its products will increase.
So what is the task of a monopolist?
A monopolist is
a price maker
a price finder.
His task
is to set
such a price
and choose such a volume
of the product
with which
its profit will be
maximum.
The general rule
of profit maximization
is that the profit is maximum
when the maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs.
This is a universal rule.
It is true for any company
even if it is completely competitive
even if it has monopolies
even if it has oligopolies
or anyone else.
The profit of any company
is maximum
when
its maximum income
is equal to the maximum costs
with such a volume of the product.
Here a monopolist does not have to
bring anything new
in comparison with a completely competitive company.
But there is an important difference.
Remember I said
that a completely competitive company
has an absolute income
equal to the price of the product.
A monopolist has nothing like that.
The absolute income of a monopolist
is always less than the price
at which
the monopolist
sells his product.
We need to figure this out.
Let's take
the simplest
conditional function
of the demand for the product
of a monopolist.
The demand
for the product
of a monopolist
is
p
minus q.
p is equal to
10 minus q.
p is the price
and q is the demand.
And what do we see?
The higher the price
the lower the demand.
Here is
the function
and the data
taken from it
I have transferred to the table.
Please look at the slide.
You see
at the price
of 10
let's say
we put 10 here
the demand value will be
0.
Is it correct?
The demand value
will be 1.
And so on.
The first line
contains all possible prices
for the product of a monopolist
from 10 to 0.
The second line contains
all possible values of the demand
at a given price.
Is it clear?
The third line
contains
the income
of a monopolist
from 10 to 0.
I hope you remember
that the income is
the product
of the price
at the demand value.
So,
at the price of 0
we cannot sell
a single unit of the product
so the income is 0.
At the price of 9
we can sell a single unit
of the product
of a monopolist
but we should remember
that a monopoly cannot cancel
the demand value.
Whatever monopolist I am
at a given price
the demand for my product
will be 0.
Well,
what do we see?
The income
increases
at the price of 5
and reaches
the maximum
at the price of 25.
And then the income
starts to decrease.
Now let's calculate
the maximum income
of a monopolist.
You surely remember
the formula of the maximum income.
The maximum income
is the increase
of the revenue
divided by
the increase of the product.
And look,
the income
is the increase
of the revenue
divided by
the increase
of the product.
And look,
at first we set
the price of 10
and nobody bought anything.
Then we set the price of 9
and bought a single unit of the product.
The income increased
to what?
From 0 to 9,
that is 9.
Delta TR is 9.
Delta TR is 1.
So the maximum income
is 9.
But in this case
the maximum income
would be better
and more correct
to set not under 1,
not under TR1,
look at the slide,
but when we switch
from TR0 to TR1.
That is,
the increase of the revenue
when the product is increased
from 0 to 1.
Let's look further.
At the time of the product 1
we have the revenue of 9,
and at the time of the product 2
we have 16.
So when the product is increased
by 1 unit
from 1 to 2,
the revenue increases
from 9 to 16,
that is 7.
And the maximum income
when the product 1
is increased from 1 to 2
is 7,
and so on.
Thus, I have filled
the last line
which contains the data
about the change
of the maximum income.
Good.
And now
let's set
any volume of the issue
from the numbers
that are given
on our slide.
Let's say,
issue 3.
What price should we set
to sell 3 units of the product?
Look at the first line.
To sell 3 units of the product
the monopolist should set
the price of 7.
And what is the maximum income
at issue 3?
Look at the last line.
It is between 5 and 3.
We can prove mathematically
that at issue 3
the maximum income
will be 7.
And what is the maximum income
at issue 3?
The maximum income
will be 4.
Thus, at issue 3
the price is 7
and the maximum income
of the monopolist is 4.
The maximum income
of the monopolist
is less than the price.
Good.
Let's set another volume of the issue.
Let's say,
it will be 5.
What is the price
of 5 units of the product?
The price is 5.
And what is the maximum income
at issue 5?
Look at the last line.
It is between 1 and negative 1.
We can prove mathematically
that at issue 5
the maximum income
is 0.
And again,
the price is greater than
the maximum income.
What am I trying to say?
I am trying to explain
that the maximum income
of the monopolist
was always equal
to the price of the product.
And the monopolist's
maximum income
at any volume of the issue
is less than the price of the product.
I strongly suspect
that my explanation
is not correct.
I am not sure
that I am making a mistake.
It is a mathematical error.
I am making mistakes
with the numbers.
You can't deny the numbers.
But I would like you
to understand
why this is so.
The monopoly with its maximum income
always has a lower price
than the price of the product.
What is the problem?
Let's take this example.
Let's try this.
This is a conditional example.
I am a monopolist
in selling beer
in this city.
I am the only one who sells beer.
I don't let anyone else
to this market.
I am the only seller.
I am the only one who sells beer.
The function of the demand for beer
is given here.
If I am a monopolist soon,
I start to play with the price.
On the first day of the sale
I set the price
of 10 rubles for a bottle of beer.
How much beer did I buy?
Look at the table.
Zero.
No one buyer came to me
at this price.
The price is too high.
I start to reduce the price.
There is no place to hide.
The next day
I set the price of 9 rubles.
How much beer did I buy?
One bottle.
Who came to me?
Either the richest person
or the biggest beer lover
in this city.
At the price of 9 rubles
I sold one bottle.
Let's say I am not satisfied with this.
The next day
I set the price of 8 rubles
for a bottle of beer.
The one who bought
9 rubles
will buy 8 rubles more
with even more pleasure.
But who will come to me?
The second beer lover will come
for whom the price of 9 rubles
was too high
and 8 rubles was just right.
So,
what happens?
At the price of 8 rubles
I sold 2 bottles.
Now tell me, please,
how much money
did the second beer lover
bring me today?
The additional money
that he didn't bring me yesterday.
Yesterday he didn't bring me anything.
Today he bought
8 rubles worth of beer.
So, I got
additional 8 rubles
that I didn't get yesterday.
This is good.
What's bad?
I lost 1 ruble
to the first buyer.
Yesterday he bought me 9 rubles worth.
And now the price is the same for everyone.
The price is always the same.
At least in my case.
The price is the same for everyone.
So,
the second buyer brought me
8 rubles worth of beer.
And at the first buyer I lost 1 ruble.
So,
the increase in the profit
was not due to the price.
Now the price is 8 rubles.
And the maximum income is only 7 rubles.
Is it clear
why the maximum income
is lower than the price?
Why is the income lower than the price?
Because when we reduce the price,
we lose
to those buyers
who could buy the goods
at a higher price.
At a higher price.
Once again.
At the second buyer I won 8 rubles.
He brought me 8 rubles worth
that he didn't bring me yesterday.
But the first buyer brought me 9 rubles worth yesterday.
And today he brought me only 8 rubles.
I sell beer at 8 rubles.
So, at the first buyer I lost 1 ruble.
At the second buyer I won 8 rubles.
The maximum income is only 7 rubles.
The price is higher than the maximum income.
And we can prove
I'm not using high math.
I'm just trying to explain it with my fingers.
We can prove
that if the demand function is linear,
the minimum income function
is also linear
and its slope
is twice as big
as the slope of the demand function.
If the demand function is linear,
the minimum income function
is also linear,
it is written on the slide,
and its slope
is twice as big as the slope
of the demand curve.
So, we can see it.
Do you see the demand function?
Do you see the minimum income function?
The minimum income function
is twice as steep
as the demand function.
Its slope is twice as big.
Now let's see
how we can show
the achievement of monopole equilibrium
on the graph.
What do we see here?
The linear function is linear
and the demand function is linear.
On the other hand,
we see the minimum income function.
The minimum income function
has twice as much slope
as the demand function
for the monopole product.
I also put the functions
of the minimum and average income
of the monopolist
on this graph.
I'm sorry,
the minimum costs of the monopolist
and the average costs of the monopolist
are the same.
The minimum costs of the monopolist
and the average costs of the monopolist
are the same.
I've already said
that there is only one rule.
The maximum income
of such a product
with the minimum income
is equal to the minimum costs.
Now look at the graph
where the functions
of the minimum income
and the minimum costs
intersect.
Do you see the intersection point?
This point determines the QM output
with which
the profit of the monopolist
is the maximum.
And what is the price
that the monopolist
sets?
This price
must be found
on the demand curve.
Look.
We restore the perpendicular
from the QM point
up to the intersection
with the demand function.
And from there we lower the perpendicular
to the Y-axis,
to the price axis.
So,
in order to sell
the QM product
the monopolist
must set the price
PM for his product.
With such a price
and such a volume
of production and sale
the profit of the monopolist
becomes the maximum.
And now,
can you show
the profit,
the amount
of the monopoly profit
in the market?
Look.
What is the profit?
It's easy.
The profit is the difference
between the profit
and the total costs.
What is the profit?
It is the price
multiplied
by the volume of sales.
So,
the profit is the sum
of the total costs
multiplied by the QM.
The graphical area
is the area
of the rectangle
OPMEQM.
And where are the total costs?
The total costs
can be calculated
by multiplying
the average total costs
by the volume of production.
If so,
then the average
and the total costs
are equal to the area
of the rectangle
OCFQM.
That is, it is the area
of the lower rectangle.
And how do we get the profit?
From the area of the upper rectangle
we calculate the area
of the lower rectangle.
The area of the lower rectangle
is the area
of the rectangle
CPMEF.
And here is a very important conclusion
that follows.
Let's recall the perfect competition.
In the case of perfect competition,
the price
at which the company
sells its products
becomes equal
to the equilibrium point
of the company
by its maximum costs.
There is an equality.
P is equal to MC.
And in the monopoly rule,
the price
is higher
than the maximum costs.
You see,
the demand line
passes above
the maximum costs curve.
The maximum costs
of the monopolist
at the QM release
are equal to the OCFQM.
And the price of the monopolist
is equal to
the MCFQM.
And the price of the monopolist
at the price the monopolist set
is equal to
the OCFQM.
So, once again,
the monopolist sets a price
that exceeds the maximum costs.
And here is an important conclusion
that monopolies
are able
to increase
the price
and reduce the volume of the release.
In the conditions
of monopoly rule,
the price is higher
and the release is lower
than in the conditions
of competition.
This is the main
claim of the society
to monopolies.
Monopolies
increase the price
and reduce the volume of the release
compared to the volume of the release
that would have been
if there was competition
instead of monopolies.
This is the main reason
for the anti-monopoly policy.
Anti-monopoly policy
is a policy
of supporting competition.
In the West,
anti-monopoly policy
has been
in force
for more than
100 years.
The first anti-monopoly law
in the USA
was adopted
in the 90s
of the 19th century.
In Russia,
it was adopted
100 years later.
The text of this lecture
tells in detail
about anti-monopoly policy
and its application
to this course.
I will say
just two words.
Anti-monopoly policy
is a policy
of supporting competition.
This is the direction
it is heading.
In Russia,
a new anti-monopoly law
was adopted
in 2006.
This law
protects competition.
This law is very useful.
It contains many interesting
and new positions
aimed at
preventing monopoly domination
in the markets.
On the other hand,
our policy in Russia,
the policy of the Russian government
in this sense
is at least ambiguous.
On the one hand,
a very useful
anti-monopoly law
is adopted.
On the other hand,
new and new
large companies
are created
under the government's control.
These are so-called
national champions.
On the one hand,
we are fighting
against monopolies.
On the other hand,
we are developing monopolies.
The Russian defense industry
is expanding its orbit.
New and new enterprises
are creating holdings
under the government's
control.
The same thing
is happening in the aviation industry.
I will repeat it again.
You will read about it
in the text of the lecture.
I would like to
express the doubts
in the effectiveness
of such a policy.
Most foreign experts
and domestic experts
believe
that the policy
of state support
of large companies
will lead only to
the fact that
these companies
will become ineffective.
State support
and the absence of competition
will kill the business.
You will read about it
in the text of the lecture.